FAITH IN GOD.
SPIRITUAL BELIEF.
IS IT BEYOND UNDERSTANDING?
I JUST KNOW THAT IT MAKES A
DIFFERENCE.
I DON'T NEED A BRAIN SCAN TO
TELL ME THAT THESE PEOPLE ARE
HEALTHIER.
IF WE HAVE TO DRAW
CONCLUSIONS NOW BASED UPON THE
DATA, THE ANSWER WOULD BE BEYOND
THE FACT THAT THERE IS NONE.
SCIENCE IS NOT WIRED TO PICK
UP ANY SIGNALS.
ARE SCIENCE AND FAITH
INCOMPATIBLE?
SCIENCE IS TAKING ME TO
SPIRITUALITY.
IT IS ACTUALLY BRINGING ME
THERE.
TONIGHT, SCIENCE AND SPEA
SPEARTUALITY.
THE ULTIMATE MYSTERY.
CAPTIONS PAID FOR BY
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
AND ABC, INC.
THE INTERSECTION OF GOD AND
SCIENCE IS OFTEN A TREACHEROUS
PLACE.
WITNESS THE RUNNING BATTLE OVER
EVOLUTION.
BUT SOME SCIENTISTS WHO STUDY
THE HUMAN BRAIN ARE DETERMINED
TO DISCOVER IF RELIGIOUS
EXPERIENCE CAN BE OBSERVED OR
MEASURED.
THEY ARE ASKING IF THE BRAIN IS
WIRED FOR GOD.
THEIR EXPERIMENTS INVOLVE TAKING
IMAGES OF THE BRAIN FROM THOSE
WHO ARE DEEP IN PRAYER OR
MEDITATION.
THE IDEA IS TO FIND OUT WHICH
BRAIN CIRCUITS OPEN AND CLOSE
DURING THOSE MOMENTS AND THEN
TO ASK, "IS THERE A PHYSICAL
PATTERN TO PRAYER?"
OTHER SCIENTISTS ATTEMPT
TO INDUCE A SENSE
OF SPIRITUALITY BY STIMULATING
THE BRAIN, AND SOME RESEARCH
EVEN EXAMINES THE CONCEPT
SO CENTRAL TO ALL RELIGIONS --
LIFE AFTER DEATH.
WHETHER SCIENTISTS SHOULD EVEN
STUDY THESE THINGS IS
THE SUBJECT OF RAGING DEBATE.
MANY RELIGIONS STIPULATE THAT
MATTERS OF FAITH ARE A MYSTERY
BEYOND THE REALM OF HUMAN
UNDERSTANDING.
AND THEN THERE IS THE CHICKEN
AND EGG QUESTION --
IF, INDEED, SCIENTISTS COULD
PROVE THE HUMAN BRAIN IS WIRED
FOR RELIGION, THEN WHO --
OR WHAT -- WIRED IT THAT WAY?
"NIGHTLINE" CORRESPONDENT
MICHELLE MARTIN HAS BEEN ASKING
THESE QUESTIONS, AND GETTING
SOME VERY PROVOCATIVE ANSWERS.
[ ECSTATIC SINGING ]
Reporter: IT CAN BE
ECSTATIC --
HYPNOTIC --
FRENZIED --
EVEN BRUTAL.
BUT WHAT IS RELIGIOUS
EXPERIENCE, REALLY?
NEUROSCIENTIST MICHAEL PERSINGER
THINKS HE KNOWS.
EXPERIENCE WHICH WE BELIEVE
IS A FUTURE OF BRAIN ACTIVITY IN
THE HUMAN BRAIN AND YOU CAN
GENERATE A SPIRIT AND THAT'S THE
EXCITEMENT AND THE SCIENCE OF
IT.
IF THERE SUCH A REALITY IS IT
WOULD BE OOWN COMPREHNSIVE THAN
OUR OWN MIND.
Reporter: HE IS TRYING TO DO
WHAT MOST PEOPLE THOUGHT COULD
ONLY BE DONE BY A SUPREME BEING.
WE APPLY COMPLEX MAGNETIC
FIELDS, GENERATED
THROUGH COMPUTER, OVER THE RIGHT
HEMISPHERE, IN A CERTAIN
PATTERN.
CERTAIN PATTERNS, PREDICTABLE
PATTERNS THAT IMITATE WHAT
THE BRAIN NORMALLY DOES
DURING A VISITATION EXPERIENCE
OR SENSE-PRESENT EXPERIENCE THAT
GENERATE THESE FEELINGS.
Reporter: WHAT LOOKS LIKE
A BAD SCI-FI MOVIE IS ACTUALLY
VERY SERIOUS RESEARCH INTO HOW
THE BRAIN DETECTS REALITY,
RESEARCH THAT ENDED UP
INVESTIGATING HOW THE BRAIN
REACTS DURING SPIRITUAL
EXPERIENCES.
IN 1993, I SAW A GHOST.
AT THE TIME I WAS SURE OF IT.
BUT AS A JOURNALIST, I WASN'T
SO SURE.
I DECIDED TO INVESTIGATE.
Reporter: CANADIAN JOURNALIST
DON HILL ASKED MICHAEL PERSINGER
TO HELP FIND A SCIENTIFIC
EXPLANATION FOR HIS EXPERIENCE.
HE MADE THIS FILM AS A RECORD
OF THEIR WORK.
I FEEL AS IF SOMEONE --
SOMETHING -- IS WATCHING ME.
I'M GETTING SCARED AND I DON'T
KNOW WHY.
WHEW!
A RUSH OF --
AND ALSO VISUAL EFFECTS LIKE
A GREEN PULSE.
MY SHOULDERS ARE VERY TENSE, UP
TOWARDS MY EARS RIGHT NOW.
THIS IS AS CLOSE TO
THE EXPERIENCE I HAD
BASICALLY, WHAT
YOU EXPERIENCED WAS A SYNTHETIC
GHOST.
A GHOST GENERATED BY TECHNOLOGY.
IN THIS CASE, THE TECHNOLOGY
BEING THE COMPUTER-GENERATED
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS
THROUGH YOUR BRAIN.
THE IMPORTANT THING IS THEY WERE
NOT VERY INTENSE.
THEY COULD BE GENERATED
IN NATURE, EASILY.
Reporter: AND PERSINGER TOLD
US THAT HE'S SINCE HAD OTHER
EXAMPLES OF ONE'S ENVIRONMENT
INDUCING THE BRAIN TO HAVE
A SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE.
WE'VE INVESTIGATED TWO CASES
LOCALLY WHERE PEOPLE, A YOUNG
GIRL FELT A GOD TAKE
OVER HER BODY, SHE FELT
HER UTERUS STIMULATED, SHE FELT
A SEXUAL STIMULATION.
SHE FELT AS IF THERE WAS A CHILD
ON HER LEFT SIDE.
IT WAS HER EXPERIENCE
IN A CONTEXT OF A RELIGIOUS
FAMILY.
NEEDLESS TO SAY, THEY WERE VERY
CONCERNED, BUT IT WAS BEING
TRIGGERED.
A CLOCK THAT SHE WAS USING.
SHE SLEEPS VERY CLOSE
WITH A CLOCK TO HER HEAD.
ENDS UP WITH, WHEN WE ANALYZED
IT HAS THE SAME
FREQUENCY-MODULATED PATTERN.
IT'S ONE OF THOSE DIGITAL
CLOCKS.
VERY SIMILAR TO THE PATTERN
BECAUSE THE CLOCK WAS NOT
WORKING WELL, TO WHAT
WE GENERATE EXPERIMENTALLY
IN THE LABORATORY.
Reporter: PERSINGER IS CANDID
ABOUT ONE OF THE MOTIVATIONS
FOR HIS RESEARCH.
THE FEAR THAT THESE TECHNIQUES
IN THE WRONG HANDS COULD BE USED
TO CONTROL PEOPLE.
IF WE CAN DO IT
WITH OUR SIMPLE TECHNOLOGY, MORE
SOPHISTICATED TECHNOLOGY COULD
GENERATE SENSED PRESENCES
AND FEELINGS OF GOD EXPERIENCES
IN ENTIRE POPULATIONS
SETTING ASIDE THAT
FEAR, THE QUESTION REMAINS,
IF MICHAEL PERSINGER CAN
RE-CREATE THE SPIRITUAL
EXPERIENCES IN THE LAB, WHAT
DOES THAT SAY ABOUT
THE EXISTENCE OF GOD?
WHAT I'M GOING TO SAY IS NOT
INTENDED TO OFFEND ANYONE,
BUT SUPPOSE I SAID THAT ALL
OF US ARE BEING CONTROLLED RIGHT
NOW BY NONPHYSICAL, INVISIBLE
PINK ELEPHANTS.
NOW, YOU MAY NOT LIKE THAT IDEA,
BUT PROVE THEY'RE NOT THERE.
THE POINT IS YOU CAN'T
BECAUSE THEY'RE NONPHYSICAL
AND INVISIBLE, AND SO MANY KINDS
OF WORDS, IN ALL CULTURES, THERE
ARE CERTAIN PHRASES, CERTAIN
BELIEFS THAT ARE NONTESTABLE
BECAUSE THEY NEVER CAN BE.
BUT IF WE HAVE TO DRAW
CONCLUSIONS NOW, BASED
UPON THE DATA, THE ANSWER WOULD
BE MORE ON THE FACT THAT THERE
IS NO DEITY.
Reporter: WHY DOESN'T THAT
JUST PROVE ON ITS FACE THAT
THESE ARE BIOCHEMICAL,
NEUROLOGICAL REACTIONS,
AS OPPOSED TO THE PRESENCE
OF GOD?
RELIGION IS MUCH, MUCH MORE
THAN CERTAIN STATES OF MIND,
CERTAIN ECSTATIC FEELINGS,
CERTAIN MEDITATIVE MOMENTS
OF PIETY OR OF LONGING OR SENSE
OF BELONGING TO THE ONENESS
OF BEING.
Reporter: JOHN HAUGHT IS
PROFESSOR OF THEOLOGY
AT GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY.
THERE'S A METHODOLOGICAL
RESTRAINT THAT FORBIDS SCIENCE
FROM EVER CROSSING
OVER INTO MAKING STATEMENTS THAT
WE HAVE FINALLY ENCOMPASSED
THE TOTALITY OF OUR BEING
BY OUR METHOD OF SCIENCE, WHEN
THE SCIENTIST HAS SAID THAT
THE SCIENTIST IS NO LONGER
A SCIENTIST BUT A BELIEVER.
IF YOU WANT TO BELIEVE,
THAT'S FINE.
BELIEF CAN BE DANGEROUS.
THERE IS NO WAY TO TEST IT ONE
WAY OR T OTHER.
THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD, YOU CAN
TEST IT, AND IF WE CAN GENERATE
THE GOD EXPERIENCE, AND ALTER
THE GOD BELIEF EXPERIMENTALLY,
THAT MEANS WE HAVE A TOOL
BY WHICH WE CAN TRULY UNDERSTAND
WHAT THE BRAIN'S DOING.
WHO CREATED IT, IF INDEED IT WAS
CREATED, BECOMES IRRELEVANT.
PEOPLE HAVE LONG BELIEVED
IN THE POWER OF PRAYER
OR THE PEACE OF MEDITATION,
BUT THE BRAIN AND THE BODY
REALLY DO CHANGE DURING
SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCES.
THAT'S COMING UP IN PART TWO
OF MICHELLE MARTIN'S REPORT.
]2F
GRANT YOUR BLESSINGS SO THAT
MY MIND MAY BE ONE
WITH THE DHARMA.
Reporter: AT THIS BUDDHIST
MEDITATION CENTER
IN PHILADELPHIA, MEN AND WOMEN
COME TO MEDITATE.
THERE'S A KIND OF DEEPER REST
THAT BEGINS TO CONNECT
WITH THE WORLD OUTSIDE OF ME.
Reporter: DR. MICHAEL BAIME
IS BUDDHIST AND AN INTERNIST
AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF PENNSYLVANIA MEDICAL CENTER.
IT WAS AS IF THE BOUNDARY
I PUT BETWEEN MYSELF
AND THE WORLD OUT THERE,
THE KIND OF SEPARATION BETWEEN
ME AND EVERYTHING ELSE BEGINS
TO SOFTEN AND LOOSEN.
Reporter: BAIME AGREED TO BE
A SUBJECT FOR THE RESEARCH
CONDUCTED BY UNIVERSITY
OF PENNSYLVANIA NEURORADIOLOGIST
ANDREW NEWBERG.
WHEN PEOPLE HAVE VERY
POWERFUL SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCES,
THEY PERCEIVE THEM AS BEING
INCREDIBLY REAL.
Reporter: NEWBERG
DEMONSTRATED FOR US LAST AUGUST
HOW BAIME'S BRAIN, AS WELL
AS THE BRAINS OF OTHER TIBETAN
BUDDHISTS AND CATHOLIC NUNS,
WERE PHOTOGRAPHED
DURING MEDITATION OR PRAYER.
UNLIKE MICHAEL PERSINGER,
NEWBERG ISN'T TRYING TO PROVOKE
A SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE BUT TO,
IN ESSENCE, CATCH THE BRAIN
RED-HANDED IN THE MIDDLE
OF A CONSCIOUS ACT OF FAITH.
THEY'RE NOT JUST A SIMPLE
QUIETING OF THE MIND, PER SE,
BUT THAT THERE'S LOTS
OF DIFFERENT THINGS GOING ON,
THERE'S LOTS OF DIFFERENT PARTS
OF THE BRAIN INVOLVED THAT HELP
TO CREATE FOR US THESE VERY
POWERFUL KIND OF EMOTIONAL
AND COGNITIVE EXPERIENCES THAT
WE LABEL AS SPIRITUAL.
Reporter: NOW EVERYONE
DOESN'T MEDIATE AS PART
OF HIS OR HER RELIGIOUS
PRACTICE.
SOME PEOPLE WOULD CALL WHAT IS
CENTRAL TO HIS OR HER RELIGIOUS
PRACTICE PRAYING.
DO YOU FIND THE SAME KINDS
OF BRAIN ACTIVITY DURING WHAT
SOME OTHER TRADITIONS WOULD CALL
PRAYING OR PRAYING DEEPLY
OR PRAYING FOR A LONG TIME
OR PRAYING FULLY?
ABSOLUTELY.
EVEN WHEN PEOPLE PRAY THEY HAVE
A SENSE OF CONNECTING
WITH SOMETHING GREATER THAN
THEMSELVES.
Reporter: NOW THAT YOU HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO MAP WHAT IS GOING
ON IN THE BRAIN WHILE PEOPLE ARE
HAVING CERTAIN KINDS
OF EXPERIENCES, WHEN PEOPLE ARE
HAVING DEEPLY MEDITATIVE
OR PRAYERFUL EXPERIENCES, WHAT
ELSE WOULD YOU LIKE TO KNOW?
WELL, ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE'RE VERY INTERESTED IN IS
SEEING THE LINK BETWEEN WHAT
HAPPENS DURING SPIRITUAL
PRACTICES AND EXPERIENCES
TO PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PHYSICAL
HEALTH.
SO THAT WE CAN SEE EXACTLY WHY,
WHEN PEOPLE PRAY OR MEDITATE,
WHY THEY LOWER THEIR BLOOD
PRESSURE, WHY THEY MAY AFFECT
THEIR IMMUNE SYSTEM
OR THEIR HORMONE SYSTEM, ALL
CHANGES THAT HAVE BEEN SHOWN
TO OCCUR BUT PEOPLE DON'T
UNDERSTAND EXACTLY WHY THAT'S
HAPPENING.
Reporter: THERE ARE SOME WHO
MIGHT ARGUE THAT ULTIMATELY
TRYING TO SORT OF FIND WAYS
TO KIND OF REPLICATE
THE HEALTHFUL OR BENEFICIAL
EFFECTS OF THE RELIGIOUS
EXPERIENCE SO THAT IT CAN BE
DISPENSED.
WHICH IS NOT WHAT RELIGION IS
FOR.
NO, OF COURSE NOT.
AND WE ACTUALLY REALLY DO NOT
FEEL THAT THE WAY OF SOME
OF OUR COLLEAGUES, WHICH IS THAT
THERE ARE WAYS OF STIMULATING
THESE KINDS OF EXPERIENCES THAT
YOU MAY ULTIMATELY BE ABLE TO DO
SOMETHING WHERE PEOPLE WOULD
COME IN AND YOU'D STIMULATE
A PARTICULAR RELIGIOUS
EXPERIENCE AND THEN SEND THEM
OUT.
I DON'T THINK OUR RESEARCH
SUGGESTS THAT.
IN FACT, WHAT I THINK IT SHOWS
IS THAT THESE ARE VERY COMPLEX
KIND OF EXPERIENCES.
SOMETHING THAT IS FAR DEEPER
THAN WHAT SOMEBODY COULD JUST
STIMULATE THROUGH ELECTRODES
OR THROUGH SOME TYPE OF DRUG
EXPERIENCE OR SOMETHING LIKE
THAT.
Reporter: AND YET,
WITHOUT ELECTRODES OR DRUGS,
THAT IS EXACTLY WHAT
DR. MICHAEL BAIME IS DISPENSING.
AND OVER THE LAST EIGHT YEARS
WE'VE TRAINED MORE THAN
1,300 PEOPLE TO PRACTICE THESE
ANCIENT TECHNIQUES.
AND I JUST KNOW THAT IT MAKES
A DIFFERENCE.
I DON'T NEED A BRAIN SCAN
TO TELL ME THAT THESE TWO PEOPLE
ARE HEALTHIER, THAT THEY FEEL
BETTER, THAT THEY FUNCTION
BETTER IN THEIR LIVES.
THEY TELL US AND WE HAVE
STUDIES, RESEARCH THAT SHOWS
THAT THAT'S THE CASE.
Reporter: YOU'RE MAPPING
THE WAY THE BRAIN BEHAVES
DURING A CERTAIN KIND
OF SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE.
ISN'T THE INESCAPABLE CONCLUSION
THAT THOSE SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCES
ARE A FUNCTION OF THE BRAIN'S
ACTIVITY, THAT THE BRAIN IS
DOING THIS RATHER THAN GOD DOING
THIS?
SOMEBODY WHO IS VERY
RELIGIOUS MIGHT LOOK AT THIS
AND SAY, "YOU KNOW, OF COURSE
THIS MAKES SENSE.
IF GOD IS UP THERE AND WE'RE
GOING HAVE SOME KIND
OF COMMUNICATION OR SOME KIND
OF CONTACT AND SOME KNOWLEDGE
OF GOD, THEN OUR BRAINS
NECESSARILY WOULD BE DESIGNED
BY GOD, PERHAPS, TO HAVE THAT
ABILITY, TO HAVE THAT
EXPERIENCE, TO HAVE THAT SENSE
OF COMMUNICATION OR UNION
WITH GOD."
Reporter: WHAT DO YOU THINK?
WELL, I THINK THE ANSWER
ACTUALLY LIES SOMEWHERE
IN BETWEEN, AND I THINK THAT
WE CAN'T REALLY GET AT THE TRUE
ANSWERS ABOUT WHAT IS OUT THERE
IN REALITY WITHOUT LOOKING
AT BOTH THE SCIENTIFIC AS WELL
AS THE SPIRITUAL PERSPECTIVE.
AND WHETHER THAT ULTIMATE
REALITY BECOMES JUST PHYSICAL,
MATERIAL REALITY, OR SOMETHING
THAT IS VERY SPIRITUAL
AND DIVINE IN ITS ORIENTATION,
THOSE ARE THE QUESTIONS THAT WE,
THAT ALL HUMAN BEINGS ULTIMATELY
HAVE TO FACE AND COME TO TERMS
WITH.
Reporter: FOR MICHAEL BAIME,
HOWEVER, THERE MAY NEVER BE
A COMING TO TERMS WHEN IT COMES
TO SPIRITUALITY AND THE BRAIN.
WHETHER WE CALL IT GOD
OR SOMETHING ULTIMATE
AND ABSOLUTE, THE NATURE
OF REALITY, THE FUNDAMENTAL
NATURE, IT'S HARD TO GET AROUND
SOME KIND OF LABEL.
YOU COULD CALL IT EMPTINESS,
AS SOME SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM DO.
BUT YOU'RE STILL JUST APPLYING
A LABEL THAT MEANS SOMETHING
ABSOLUTE.
THAT'S HOW OUR VOCABULARIES
WORK.
WE CAN ONLY TALK ABOUT THINGS
THAT CAN BE DESCRIBED IN WORDS.
I THINK THAT THIS EXPERIENCE IS
BIGGER THAN THE KINDS OF THING
THAT CAN BE ENCOMPASSED
BY VOCABULARY.
Reporter: STREETS FILLED
WITH THE FACES OF THOSE LOST
ON SEPTEMBER 11th.
MEMORIES MINGLING WITH DISBELIEF
THAT THE THOUSANDS WHO DIED ARE,
IN FACT, GONE.
THERE'S STILL, FOR MANY, THAT
SPIRITUAL SENSE OF CONNECTION
TO THOSE WHO HAVE PASSED AWAY.
AND FOR SOME SCIENTISTS, WHAT
HAPPENS IN THE BRAIN TO SUSTAIN
THAT CONNECTION MAY BE ANOTHER
PATHWAY TO GOD.
SOME OF THE RELATIVES OF THOSE
WHO DIED ATTENDED A TAPING
OF "CROSSING OVER
WITH JOHN EDWARD."
EDWARD IS A MEDIUM WHO CLAIMS
HE CAN CONTACT LOVED ONES WHO
HAVE DIED.
THE IMPORTANT THING YOU
CONTINUE TO CONNECT WITH OTHERS
DURING YOUR PROCESS OF GRIEVING.
Reporter: THIS IS A SHOW
FROM LAST AUGUST.
SHOWS WITH THE 9/11. NEXT OF KIN
WERE NEVER AIRED.
CRITICS ACCUSED EDWARD OF TAKING
ADVANTAGE OF THEIR SUFFERING.
PEOPLE ASK US, THEY SAY, "ARE
YOU TRYING TO PROVE SURVIVAL
OF CONSCIOUSNESS?"
AND WE SAY ABSOLUTELY NO.
WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO IS
ENCOURAGE RESEARCH ON SURVIVAL
OF CONSCIOUSNESS.
AND IN FACT, WE'RE TRYING
TO GIVE SURVIVAL OF
CONSCIOUSNESS THE OPPORTUNITY
TO PROVE ITSELF OR NOT.
Reporter: MEDIUMS, INCLUDING
JOHN EDWARD, THOUGH, HAVE
SUBMITTED THEMSELVES
TO SCIENTIFIC SCRUTINY
AS ADMINISTERED BY THE HEAD
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA'S
HUMAN ENERGY SYSTEMS LABORATORY
PROFESSOR GARY SCHWARTZ.
THE MEDIUMS WHO PARTICIPATE
IN THIS RESEARCH HAVE TO WORK
UNDER VERY UNUSUAL
AND CONTROLLED CONDITIONS
Reporter: TO PREVENT ANY
TRICKERY, SCHWARTZ HAD MEDIUMS
HIDDEN BEHIND A SCREEN
FROM THE PERSON THEY WERE TRYING
TO HELP CONTACT DEAD RELATIVES.
A PERSON THEY HAD NEVER MET
BEFORE.
IN ADDITION, THOSE WHO THE
MEDIUMS
WERE TRYING TO HELP COULD NOT
SAY A WORD.
AND WHAT WE'VE DISCOVERED,
ACTUALLY QUITE TO MY SURPRISE,
IS THAT THEY REALLY DO GET VERY
ACCURATE INFORMATION THAT IS
STRONGLY CONSISTENT
WITH THE IDEA THAT PEOPLE'S
DEPARTED LOVED ONES ARE STILL
HERE.
Reporter: THAT IS, SCHWARTZ
CONTENDS, SOME ENERGY OF THOSE
WHO HAVE DIED CONTINUES TO EXIST
IN SUCH A MANNER THAT FEW
PEOPLE, THE MEDIUMS, CAN
ACTUALLY DISCERN.
AND, OF COURSE, WHAT
OUR MEDIUMSHIP RESEARCH DOES IS
IT FORCES US TO REALLY THINK
THAT THE EARTH IS NOT FLAT BUT,
IN FACT, IT'S ROUND.
IT POINTS TO A NEW VISION, WHICH
SAYS THAT MAYBE THERE REALLY IS
SOMETHING MUCH BIGGER THAN US.
AND WE HAVE THE CAPABILITY
TO ACTUALLY APPRECIATE IT
AND LEARN TO LIVE WITHIN IT,
AND POSSIBLY MANIFEST IT.
Reporter: SCHWARTZ LAB IS
DEDICATED TO MEASURING THE LOW
LEVELS OF ENERGY THAT COME
FROM THE BODY AND WHAT THOSE
ENERGY LEVELS CAN TELL US
ABOUT OUR PHYSICAL AND MENTAL
HEALTH.
AND WHETHER OR NOT THAT ENERGY,
INCLUDING OUR OWN CONSCIOUSNESS,
SURVIVES DEATH.
THE TRUTH IS, THOSE KINDS
OF QUESTIONS, SUCH
AS COMMUNICATION WITH DIVINITY,
PEOPLE WHO LITERALLY TALK TO GOD
ON A REGULAR BASIS, OR THE IDEA
OF SENDING LOVING ENERGY
TO PEOPLE THAT WE CARE ABOUT,
OR PRAYING FOR OTHERS,
OR THE ALTRUISTIC
AND COMPASSIONATE MOTIVE
EXPERIENCING EVERYONE
AS A MEMBER OF YOUR FAMILY,
THE ENTIRE PLANET AS A PART
OF YOUR FAMILY, THE ENTIRE
THOSE AND OTHER EXPERIENCES CAN
NOW BE BROUGHT INTO
THE LABORATORY.
WE CAN LOOK AT THE BRAIN
MECHANISMS THAT ARE INVOLVED
WITH THAT PROCESS, BUT EVEN MORE
IMPORTANTLY, WE CAN LOOK TO SEE
WHAT EXTENT THOSE PROCESSES ARE
ACTUALLY ACCURATE,
BECAUSE WE CAN NOW DO OTHER
KINDS OF EXPERIMENTS, LIKE
OUR MEDIUMSHIP EXPERIMENTS,
TO DOCUMENT THEIR VERACITY.
Reporter: THE EXPERIMENTS
WITH THE MEDIUMS INVOLVE
COMPARING THE BRAIN WAVES
AND HEART RATES OF BOTH
THE MEDIUM AND THE PERSON
FOR WHOM HE OR SHE IS TRYING
TO CONTACT THE DEAD.
AND ONE OF THE FUNDAMENTAL
QUESTIONS IS, HOW DOES A MEDIUM
RECEIVE THIS KIND
OF INFORMATION?
TO WHAT EXTENT ARE THEY USING
SPECIFIC REGIONS OF THE BRAIN
WHICH ARE PURPORTEDLY ASSOCIATED
WITH OTHER KINDS OF MYSTICAL
OR RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCES?
FOR EXAMPLE, THE RIGHT TEMPORAL
LOBE, WHICH SOME PEOPLE CALL
THE "GOD SPOT," IS THIS REGION
ACTIVATED WITHIN A GENUINE
MEDIUM?
THE MEDIUMSHIP RESEARCH IS
ACTUALLY A WINDOW OR A DOORWAY,
IF YOU WILL, TO A MUCH LARGER
SPIRITUAL REALITY WHICH
INTEGRATES ANCIENT WISDOM
WITH CONTEMPORARY SCIENCE.
WHAT'S FASCINATING IS THAT
SCIENCE IS TAKING ME
TO SPIRITUALITY, NOT TAKING IT
AWAY.
IT'S ACTUALLY TAKING ME THERE.
Reporter: FOR SCHWARTZ,
HIS RESEARCH CAN ONLY CONCLUDE
THAT THE HUMAN BRAIN IS WIRED
TO RECEIVE SIGNALS FROM A GRAND
ORGANIZING DESIGN, OR G.O.D.
FOR SHORT.
SURVIVAL OF CONSCIOUS TELLS
US THAT CONSCIOUSNESS DOES NOT
REQUIRE A BRAIN AND THAT
OUR MEMORIES, OUR INTENTIONS,
OUR INTELLIGENCE, OUR DREAMS
THAT ALL OF THAT CAN EXIST
OUTSIDE OF THE PHYSICAL BODY.
NOW, BY THE WAY, THAT'S THE SAME
IDEA THAT WE HAVE ABOUT GOD,
THAT SOMETHING THAT IS
"INVISIBLE," THAT IS "BIGGER
THAN
ALL OF US" WHICH WE CANNOT SEE
CAN HAVE INTELLECT, CREATIVITY,
INTENTION, MEMORY AND CAN
INFLUENCE THE UNIVERSE.
Reporter: IT SHOULD COME
AS NO SURPRISE THAT SCHWARTZ
AND HIS WORK WITH MEDIUMS HAS
ITS DETRACTORS.
IN FACT, A NUMBER OF HIS PEERS,
NOT TO MENTION MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC, CONSIDER IT
RIDICULOUS.
WHICH IS UNDERSTANDABLE SINCE IT
SEEMS ABSURD, AS ABSURD AS IT
ONCE WAS TO SUGGEST THAT
THE SUN, NOT THE EARTH, IS
THE CENTER OF THE UNIVERSE.
IT IS TOO SOON TO SAY WHETHER
ANY OF THESE INQUIRIES
INTO THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
MIND, BODY AND SPIRIT WILL PROVE
TO BE MERE DIVERSIONS
OR AS EARTH-SHATTERING
AS GALILEO'S DISCOVERY.
BUT THE INVESTIGATIONS WILL GO
ON, BECAUSE THE HUMAN DESIRE
TO KNOW AND UNDERSTAND IS
INFINITE.
OMORROW ON "NIGHTLINE."
THAT'S OUR REPORT
FOR TONIGHT.
I'M CHRIS BURY IN WASHINGTON.